So I've just got to do something at the very beginning, that's okay. I've just got to say that my name is Marsha Mani and I'm here with Hugh Grant, not the Hugh Grant.
The better looking one.
Stop it John. Then John Southerl and John Southerl.
Southerl.
Southerl and Mrs Southerl. What's your Christian name?
Valerie.
Valerie and then it's, we're at, I can't say it, Koikouniou.
Koikouniou.
Yes, translated means Cornishman's Wood.
Really?
Yeah. Curnow is the Cornish way of saying Corn or Curnow. It's just like a corruption of Curnow, Curniou and Koid as well as for wood, as in, not a lump of wood, as in a clump of trees.
So.
So it's this Cornishman's Wood.
Do we know why?
Yes, it goes back to King, was it? Back to early medieval times when he granted this land to the Duke or, I think it would be the Duke of Cornwall.
And hence it was called then Koid Curniou, Cornishman's Wood.
Ah.
I didn't know that.
You don't know everything, ma'am. I have independently found out certain things.
I'm not sure if it was, who was it, Edward Longshanks, it might have been, the Hammer of the Scots, it might have been him or his son.
With the third or the fourth.
It was the third, wasn't it?
Yeah, Longshanks.
Longshanks, yeah. Yeah, so, the Hammer of the Scots. I think it might have been him or his son that granted this to the Earl of Cornwall or the Duke of Cornwall or whatever.
So it's April the 18th, 2019. I've just got to have those details down for archival purposes. So, do you mind me, Valerie, if I ask your date of birth?
Everybody asks me that. I don't know what date it is.
29th of the 13th, I'm just 29th. It was the 90th last week.
Yeah.
90?
90, yeah, 29th.
My God, you look good to 90, don't you?
I don't feel very good.
Oh, my goodness.
I don't know what better when there's leg-wadding in such a state.
That's right, yeah.
So, where were you born, Valerie?
In Marshfield. Well, Castleton it was then.
Yeah.
The address was Castleton. Between McMarshfield and...
In Gathley Bay?
Yeah, in Gathley... No, yeah, Gathley Bay.
That's the farm?
Yeah.
How do you spell that?
Well, we always spelled it G-double-L-Y-B-A-R.
But it was G-double-L-I?
No, when I was living down there it was G-double-L-Y-B-E-A-R, Gathley Bay, is what it was called.
And what does that mean?
I don't know. But people after altered it and they put it to Gathley Gay.
So, people only know it really as Gathley Gay, not Gathley Bay.
Even, you know, when I was living down there.
It's Gathley Bay.
Pardon?
It's Gathley Bay, though.
I don't know whether they call it Gathley Bay.
Yeah, it's Gathley Bay.
Oh, Gathley Bay, but it must be spelled different.
G-double-L-I-B-E-R.
And it's still there?
Yeah, it's a...
It's not the farm as it was when I was there.
It's more like a mansion, though.
Yeah, it is.
So, but John, you were saying it was the old... it said to be the oldest house in Mummarsh here?
That was always the thought, wasn't it?
What's that?
That Gathley Bay was the oldest house in Mummarsh.
Yeah, well, it was always said. I don't know how true that was.
And they used to say about this woman that it was drawn during the big floods, you know, in the...
It was supposed to be drawn in the window above the porch.
Yeah.
But rather it wasn't true, though, was it? It was found out there was...
Like a lot of these old tales, they tell you to be...
It got altered, you know. But it was true, wasn't it?
But she wasn't the ghost, though, was she?
I'd never seen a ghost on a house.
Do you know, they had a corridor going between the rooms up there there?
Yeah.
There was three... no, two and a half, actually, planks like that of an oak tree cut in the...
That was the floorboards.
Just three?
Yeah.
Wow.
But they were... as they were cut from the tree, you know, just...
shizzled off, like, you know, polished sort of thing.
That's phenomenal.
And then he went down the steps then into a little room, and that room was where she's supposed to have drowned.
That was the original story.
So who was she? Do we know who she was?
You knew the name, didn't you?
Yeah, I can't remember it.
I've heard the story, yeah, and I remember then...
Oh...
I read it not so long ago somewhere.
I'll get back to you in an hour, Marcia.
Okay.
I'll definitely get back to you in an hour.
I know I've got that written down somewhere.
There is a history...
So I remember thinking, oh, Christ, I must remember to tell that to Mam.
There was a history of that in Marshfield Church, my darling, the records of...
Oh, right.
...of the plan, because it was built the same year.
It was built the same year as the church?
Yeah.
So is it to Norman Church?
I don't know.
I know it was a monastery years ago.
What, the church or the farmhouse?
The farmhouse.
A monastery?
We're looking from the farmhouse, like looking down here, you'd be looking at the church.
Yeah.
You know, to get the fields down.
Well, apparently the sea used to come...
There was no seawall then, look, and that was...
The ships used to come up down here, and the pirates used to go in the church,
and they had a tunnel from the church up into the farmhouse, look.
And they used to have spirits and all, you know, do all that sort of thing.
And they were...
The archaeologists did come there digging up after we left, like, you know.
They wanted to know a lot about it, because they'd heard these stories,
and they did find the beginning of a path of a tunnel, but it was all...
Really?
All gone in, like, you know, sunk in.
So on the slope you could...
And it would look...
You'd look straight into the...
Like, from the porch to the church porch, you was more or less looking straight in.
They were identical.
Gosh!
It's almost a straight line.
Yeah.
The walls were seven foot thick in that place, right?
Hmm.
That's believable.
So how old do you think it is?
Well, it's...
I don't know whether that was true.
We're not very good with the centuries.
I thought it was built in the 11th century.
I don't know if that was right.
Wow.
But that would make it Norman.
Yeah, that sounds about right.
Yeah.
But it was...
When it was built then, it was only...
It was just like a small place, but it was built...
The front of it was the same, you know.
And in 1909, Lord Trudeegan had it altered, because the house itself was down in the ground,
like, part of it, and they dug it all out, and they filled part of the house in,
the cellar that was to be there, with all the rubble and the stuff from the orchard,
because my gran was...
She married my grandfather, I don't know what year it was.
She was 18, he was 21, I think, and she used to have a few words with him.
She'd go in...
It was before it was dug out now, and she'd climb out through the pantry window
and run up back to her father in St. Melan's, to her father's house,
and then they dug it all out.
It was a big boat this width, I suppose, of paving in all round,
and then you had the orchard, it was set in a circle, like, you know.
So was it like a walled orchard?
They never put a wall there, the orchard was left as a bank.
Gosh.
But the host...
Well, they do a pre-casted part of it then, you know,
but the top part, I think, was left as it was.
There were 13 rooms in then, after they'd done it all,
but when the monks were there, it was only a small place,
because we had a photograph of that from someone,
I can't even know what happened to that.
So do you know who the monks were?
I don't know.
How curious.
And then they...
I'll tell you, the old vicar from Marshfield,
that's where we used to get a lot of our knowledge of the farm,
but he was very interested in all that sort of thing.
What was his name?
Karen Stanley.
And he did a lot of...
Wasn't it Stanley Stanley?
Pardon?
Well, we always called him Karen Stanley.
I'm sure you remember seeing him.
I think that's his son, he was a doctor.
And he was Stanley Stanley.
He was Stanley, yes, Stanley Stanley.
No, that was that place.
That's right, Dr Stanley Stanley.
That's right, I remember, I know Dr Stanley Stanley,
not a reverend, yeah.
So did it belong to the Tredegas then?
Yeah, Tredegas, yeah, it always belonged to Tredegas.
So it was a tenanted farm?
Tenancy, yeah, there was no...
Well, when I left there, there was no water, no electric,
no... nothing like that down there.
So describe it to me, what did it look like,
and what rooms did you have?
Well, you look at the front of the church,
it looked like that,
and it was a...
it was difficult to explain.
Because where they added, added on,
another part of the house,
donkeys years ago,
the roof used to come down from that one and down from that one,
and you had a gully at the top,
and if it snowed, it used to get all full of snow up in there,
up in that area.
In the house?
No, up on the roof, like, you know.
But we never went up in the attic,
it was all...
Gondolier.
Gondolier, you know, you had to go up there,
haunted.
Haunted?
Was it haunted?
I've never seen a ghost there.
There was supposed to have been a ghost,
but I'd never seen him, or whoever it was supposed to be.
It was supposed to be the woman that drowned.
What happened to all your photographs of Gatley Bay?
I just...
Well, the pair I had in the back of the house,
I gave them away, look,
and the friend of the house,
I had them framed and I gave them to...
what?
What do you call them?
Myrrhals?
No, not Myrrhals, the other one.
Haels?
When they moved there, look.
I was looking for them, and I thought that I remembered after.
They were coloured photographs.
It was taken when the house was sold.
You know, for the agents.
You haven't got any of you
of the child living there,
or anything like that?
I got some somewhere.
I think I got one there,
and they showed you the porch.
I think it's...
my mother stood there.
I should have had time to look at that.
Look for that.
Don't worry, do you?
Have you ever been up there, John?
Gatley Bay?
Yeah, loads of times.
We got a rena-rense on the bottom of that.
It was very good.
That's where my family's from, there.
Do you know the...
Do you know the Betty and the Fam?
The Frump Fam, do you remember that?
Well, that's where all our...
my great-grandfather
was born, and all...
They had 13 children all together,
sons and daughters.
Your great-grandfather?
Yeah.
Was that Henry Steele?
No, I forget his name.
So your family
has been here for generations,
haven't they, Barry?
That's the old man from the family.
That's the old man from Betty.
He had fathered all the children.
That's your great-grandfather?
That's my great-grandfather.
And he was a clergyman?
Well, everybody says that, but I never, ever...
He's got the top.
Apparently, yeah, but nobody ever...
There's no record of him ever being a clergyman,
whether he's a false clergyman or whatever.
I know, but...
I came from...
She was a sister
to my grandfather.
He was the father
of the family, like, you know, the old ones.
Well, he looks very
upstanding, doesn't he?
When he died,
you know the
place up here on the top road?
Oh, of course it's not there, no.
It used to be called the Tavern.
They used to have a big peacock...
What do you call that?
Topiary.
Everybody knew that was where the place was,
like, you know.
The edge was like a peacock.
There was a place down at Church House
called Parsons's Patch.
And that's where all the family
are buried down there, look.
And he was being buried.
No, he died.
And it was all horses then, of course.
It collapsed with his weight
on the hill coming down to go down to the
church.
What the carts did?
The hearse that he was in.
He was such a big man.
And we've retained the genes.
So, were you
born up there then, Valerie,
in that farmhouse?
No, no, I was born in... born during
the day in Castleton.
So when did you move to the farm?
Well, I was born in the farm.
You were born in the farm?
But he lived there, didn't you?
That guy, Henry...
was that Henry Steele, ma'am?
Henry Steele.
Parsons, was it?
He was from
Berry Hill, which is just over by there.
Literally just over by there.
And mam was born in
Gatley Bay, which is a little bit further
that way. There's a load of little farms around here.
Would they have been...
Parsons is in, as well as
Berry Hill?
Grimmer's old place.
They were all Parsons's in Berry Hill.
Was Grimmer's old farm what Grimmer used to be?
Grimmer, yeah. That's Berry Hill.
What's the next one then?
I don't know.
You've got Berry Hill?
Yeah.
Isn't another farm...
Oh, no, it's over Tyn and Ant now.
We've got to move as far as Tyn and Ant, haven't we?
Tyn and Ant Cottages.
So, who were your parents
then, Valerie? What were their names?
My mother was from Cardiff.
She was a Miss Fox.
And my father was a Parsons,
look, because he was... That's his father there.
His grandfather.
Oh, no, I'm getting muddled up.
That's his grandfather there, my great-grandfather.
Yeah.
So, your father
was a Parson? Yeah.
Was he a farmer as well? Yeah, there was...
So, when you're a
Parson, does that mean you have a church?
No, it's the family name Parsons.
Oh, I see.
A Parson is a...
Sorry, I thought a churchman.
No, no.
It's like, what the hell's going on here?
His name was Parsons.
But he wasn't a Parson.
I got a small photograph somewhere
of my mother and I
stood by the...
How did your mother meet your father then?
Oh, there's a story too.
It was during the First World War.
And the food was short.
The food was... The farmer always had potatoes
and things like that.
And they'd grown their own food.
I found that photograph of Nan.
Pardon? That photograph of Nan.
You know, the one they got in that
silvery thing with the clock on it.
I don't know.
God, I got that somewhere.
I got a photograph of my mother.
She stood
in the front bit, in the porch.
But talking about
the name of the...
I'll have to look it up.
Give it to Johnny.
So your mother met your father in the First World War?
She was a young woman then.
She had a friend.
She lived in Cardiff in Marion Street.
And they used to come out.
My grandmother was a friend
of this lady that lived
in the farm at the time.
And... Oh, my grandmother.
That's right, of course. What am I on about?
She came out to see my grandmother.
And
they went out the back.
And all the peelings of the
potatoes was out there.
And my mother couldn't get over that
because they had no potatoes in town.
So she took a bag of these
potatoes home and scrubbed them.
The potatoes, the skins.
Yeah, the peelings.
Cooked them. So my
grandmother said to her, would you like some
cheese for your dinner?
So they agreed on cheese.
Well, when my mother seen the plate of cheese
she thought it was for all of them.
Which for her...
She used to make her own cheese and I'd look.
And of course they had nothing like that
during the First World War.
They were down and out, starving practically.
You know, you couldn't get food.
I know, I scanned it
and I got it on my computer in work.
I got a photograph of
now I'm standing right by that
porch and I can't find it.
I know that photograph of Nan
with her brother and sister
and mum and dad.
Well, that's the one
he was looking for. There's two he was looking for.
They can't find him now.
So then is that how she met your
father then?
Well, he was one of the sons there, look. So that's where she came to meet him.
There was
four sons.
Yeah, she had four sons.
She had two daughters and four
sons. My father
was the oldest and then she had a
little girl. Well, in
them days they used to
make their own beer and everything down there
because they had cider presses and
even I remember the cider presses down there
and everything. Do you? Yeah.
They were there when they left.
My Nan used to play the piano
for the silent movies in the theatres.
She used to get a half a
crown. Where?
In Canada, wasn't her? Yeah.
Before
talking she'd be the one doing the things.
She used to get a half a crown for doing all of the Saturdays.
What was her name?
May. May Fox.
May Fox? Yeah.
What a great name.
Well, she was very musical.
She used to sing.
She had certificates for singing and
studying your steadfast and all that sort of thing.
And
played the piano and all.
And when she went for her exams
she was a Miss Fox.
When we taught her
it was a Mr Bull
and when they examined her
the thing was Mr Lions.
They got that
certificate somewhere.
My brother's inherited her genes.
Really? From music. Yeah.
My brother's very great music.
He plays lots of instruments. Really?
What about you John?
I used to just crash about on the drums
having fun, you know.
Oh, look at that. That's how it used to be
don't you look?
Is that a dry window, ma'am?
That's my bedroom window, is it?
That's before they planted all the trees out.
That's before LG came in.
Wow.
Do you remember the size of the beds working?
That's the sea wall, ma'am.
That is, oh.
I thought that was the one that...
I was going to say that.
That looks very barren.
I got one of the others
somewhere.
I should have looked through these before.
I never thought.
What's this one?
This looks a bit
ancient.
Come up.
Oh, it's in here.
Do you remember
the cider press?
Do you remember them making cider there?
No. No.
I don't remember.
The cheese press was there as well.
The cheese press was in
the room used to call the dairy.
It was always called the dairy because it had a big
slate stone
right around
like that.
The cheese press would go the length of the wall.
Really?
It had two big boxes on it like that.
A lid on it and they had big stones in there.
And then
either end they had two
things you could roll.
Like an old-fashioned
mango.
But one
roller like that.
They put the cheeses underneath
in this box.
Then they put the cheeses, the vats
with the cheese in it.
They'd wind this thing up and they'd bring it down
and press it until
they pressed all the cheese in.
Then above that they used to have a room they called the cheese room
where they used to put them up to dry.
Really?
That stone steps to go up to that.
Was that before your time?
Oh yeah, my gran used to do that.
But I don't remember it.
I remember making it once with a bit of cheese
down there but not with the presses.
All the vats used to be all around the
vats are the things they put the cheese in.
The wooden things.
She used to get first prize in
Caerphilly for the cheese.
Did she have
a name for it?
Caerphilly cheese.
Wow, that's amazing.
Do you remember the taste?
Yeah, I can remember
the cheese, yeah.
I don't know if those
were pictures, no.
So did you have to work
on the farm? I worked on the farm all my life.
What did you have to do?
Everything.
I was milking when I was nine.
I was milking cows.
Really?
And it was all hand milk then?
Yeah.
Was that full of the cheese?
No, that went down the dairies.
Down the mashfield dairies.
Oh, it went to mashfield dairies.
And my father
he was the
the one son
was in the army.
The other son, he couldn't go
to the army because he had
something wrong with his
asthma and something. So he failed his
test. My father had to stay
home.
The other one went to the
where did he go?
The younger one went to the
university so he was out of it.
He never done anything with the war.
But my father,
he stayed home
because
all those sons and daughters
over there that
lived there
that was including my grandfather
were drunkards.
They were all
and of course
the father, my grandfather
was tenant to
Tredegar
all the farms was owned by
Tredegar. Oh, were they?
And so was all the game?
Everything. You didn't touch anything
on the farm because my father
was a good shot with a gun.
You didn't dream of shooting
a pheasant, did you?
Or fishing.
There was no fishing around there.
I know they used to sneak
a couple occasionally.
They used to be
a little break as they used to call it
like a little wood just
past the house. And in the
moonlight night you'd see the pheasants
perched in the trees.
And
the one brother who would keep a lookout
at the old Holloway, Holloway's name was
The gamekeeper, was he?
The gamekeeper. Yeah.
He wasn't around because he was sneaky
you know.
And then my father would be there
shooting a pheasant
you know. But they wouldn't touch it.
They'd shoot it. They'd see it drop out
the tree leg and then they'd go
and wait until the next morning before they
go and pick it up. Terrified they'd get
checked out. Look if they got caught.
Yeah.
Then what are they going to do with the feathers?
They were afraid to leave a feather on
anywhere around like you know. Gosh.
So they used to have to burn them then.
And as
they plucked them so they burned. I can remember
that. Yeah. When they used to sneak
the pheasants. Really?
Yes because I always wanted one
of them pretty long tails out of the
photo. Yeah. I couldn't have one of them.
They had it. No, no, you
mustn't have that like you know. Gosh.
They were still afraid of it.
And if you found a pheasant's nest
when you were you know when
as kids he was always rolling around
and you'd go and tell Holloway
you'd get half a crown for the clutch of that
egg so those eggs looked at showing where they
were. Really? So they'd go and hatch them out then over
to over there. Over to
Tegur.
So Derek and I asked
my brother like you know we used to always go around
looking for pheasant's nests.
And if there was only a couple of eggs who
touched them don't go over there, don't go over there
until she finished laying them all look
and then go and tell Holloway
then. Because they used to have
big pheasant shoots then on those eggs. Yeah, yeah.
They'd breed them then look.
Ah. But er
there was hard times then.
So did you say
you didn't have water or electricity?
No, no. They had a pump
for water. Outside?
Yeah. Well everything was
outside. Is that from a borehole though?
Is that from a borehole?
In the ground? Is it a well?
Yeah, fresh spring water. There must have been a spring
there like you know just in front of the house.
But I'll have a look for
some of their old photographs and
I'll give them to John.
I know he's got some somewhere but I don't know where they are
at the moment. We'll come back with a transcription
anyway so we can have a look
at them then. What about toilets then?
Was there toilets outside?
You had to go
half a mile up the garden for that.
And there was a toilet
it was all
as long as a settee perhaps.
And you had a big hole that end
and a small hole that end.
Anything in between? Nothing.
Oh. All eyes to the front.
No, it was a
shed
like a building built
like you know in this toilet built in there.
And then
it had like a cesspit at the back of it.
And every so often you had to take a
bag of white lime or something
that had to be thrown in there.
But there was nothing at all.
There was a big seat for the
grown ups and a little seat hole for
the kids.
And a chamber pot under the bed?
Well they were there when I was in the house.
That went on the rhubarb.
So that's why you know the hours after.
Don't you wonder why the people
in the valleys got good rhubarb?
No. They used to throw their wheelies in there.
They used to have their toilet pans
on the rhubarb. I've never
heard that.
Never eating rhubarb again. My god.
Did you have, was that one of your jobs?
Did you have to do that?
Was that one of your jobs? No, we would have if we
had rhubarb.
Well there was no sanities
no collection of sanities
or anything like that.
Or ash
nothing like that. So where did
your heating come from? Did you have a range?
That range is still in the farmhouse.
Is it?
They haven't ripped it out?
I think they got it as a wine thing.
It would be worth a fortune
then wouldn't it? They'd love that sort of thing.
Those oak
panels
on the floor. These days
the architectural salvage
they'd be charging thousands for that sort of thing.
They must have been a whole
plank out of a tree
cut down three, like
two.
The width of the tree and one and a half
So were there any secret rooms in the house
or anything like that?
Well only the one
secret they used to call it the
kutch.
And that's where they reckoned the
ponds used to come up look.
They'd come from the church down in the
under the, what do you call it, the best tree
I think it is down there.
There's a place they reckoned they'd come from there.
And up under this tunnel
that used to come up in the farm. They invested
all about it but they couldn't get
because they were asking me about that
you know. Oh pirates you mean?
Yeah. Oh wow.
Smugglers, smugglers whatever they are.
They'd bring their boats up the channel
and because there was
nothing there then
Peterstone was the biggest port
in South Wales then wasn't it?
So the sea would have been much closer then?
They'd be down here at St Bryce
Peterstone you know. Why really?
Because there was a dock
it was quite a lot of tunnel mine
but
the biggest port in South Wales until
probably about 1400
some of that. And the old cannon
standing, ER was reckoned
the monks.
We don't know if there's a field down
in fact down in the moors by the
railway lane which was rented
by the family like you know
over the house down there land.
And it was always called the church yard
never thought
anything about it like we know
so it was over in the church yard
over the middle of the field
and the old cannon standing
investigated and he reckoned
it was the monks with their burial
grounds. The monks?
The monks from the farm
with their burial ground in that
piece of ground yeah.
So
I don't know.
You know we got no proof
of it like you know.
There was nothing in the house to
suggest that. We didn't find
anything in the garden. I know we had
a big door to go in
the front door but
you had this big porch in the front
you know and then inside you had
another
big door, an oak door
that was. Gosh it was
a huge thing we never used to shut
it down. It was heavy to shut.
A big door. That was left
on the farm.
One little piece of our bank left.
I wonder if I should knock on the door
and have a look. I've already taken a city down a
bit. What's the show about? I'd love to
see that John. What's that? What you're just talking
about? The um
pizza and war.
Somebody else was talking about that the other day.
Was it, what's the name with
doing the history?
My grandfather would never pack a
card in here was the look. Why not?
Because there's a farm
where it's not the farm. There was a golf course
down near the Mardy they called it.
His brother was down there, Henry Parsons.
And every
Sunday night they used to have a
card session down there
with a gambling going on you know.
Drinking gambling.
But something happened one night.
I inherited the gambling genes.
One night apparently
they swore the devil come down
the chimney. The one
went out and hung himself on the gate. One of these
folks that was there, they didn't know who he was.
But he hung himself.
My father, my grandfather, he was
petrified. He'd never have a
he wouldn't have a pack of cards anywhere in the house.
Leave alone play. You didn't
get a pack of cards. Oh my
goodness. They were petrified.
I know they used to, they were
a lot of drinkers but
Doesn't mean good cider. Yeah.
His one sister
I don't know what would she be to me.
He was my great grandfather.
Anyway, it's one of his sisters.
Her husband
kept the Royal Oak in Cardiff.
He owned that.
And she used to get drink
all the time.
He used to pay privately
for a woman to look after her
to make sure she didn't get the drink
from the bar or whatever.
But she was still getting the drink
all the time. So
still getting drink.
They decided then they were going to move.
So they moved.
And when they started to move
suddenly was rattling in the
furniture. She had all the back
cut open like you know.
And stitched and she had it all packed in
between the springs or the backs
of the furniture. And she was
having a nip now and again.
Filled with bottles of spirits.
Well she had somebody in tow
with her I think. Getting it
pulled. And she had it
stuffed in there. Well I can remember
her because she came at the farm to live.
Why did she come to live with you?
Because that
family is all mixed up.
Brothers married
wives and
sisters
cousins. Married first cousins.
Oh my goodness.
Anyway
the one woman
my aunt that was living
with us.
Her father, her husband
was
my father's brother
look. And
he was the one that was in the war.
Well they got married
and she went on both calls
to live. Of course her mother went with her.
Little woman she was
with
white thick hair she had.
And only little. And
she'd come up now
my aunt now up to see
his brother now. The farm.
She'd leave her mother down there
look with her husband.
And then she'd get a message
somebody'd send a message up that
she was drunk again.
They couldn't find out where she was
getting it from.
They tried always. Still getting
it. So anyway she got drunk
this one day and my aunt went
down to see what her mother
had been up to like you know.
And they had to carry it up to bed and her head went on
one side and she used to have a big bun at the back
of her head. And she had a little bottle in there
full of
brandy.
It's quite ingenious
really isn't it. Well she'd do look she'd stop
people on the doorstep and ask them
to give them a few pound look to go and
get a bottle of whiskey.
They were all
heavy drinkers.
My father
what a family. All the sons
the four sons. The people who were pride on.
Because their father
drunk all the money on the farm
and he went bankrupt.
When he
died then they took
well before he died
they took over.
They went to dig
his brother the brother that was in the farm
his family
Berry Hill paid
the rent to keep his brother there
look. Really. He didn't let them know
that he'd gone bankrupt but it was silently
he was paying the rent.
My father found out
look. So
he was an
engineer in Newport
in the docks. He'd give up his job
and the other one was home
normally. And the two
of them together
got enough money to pay back
what they paid the
other brother to be tenants
again. So the larger diggers
didn't even know that that
had happened sort of thing. Really.
So anyway
that's how
they came to be.
As I said they were all drunkards.
And the women
seemed to marry
drunkards like you know
farmers and because they used to make
their own most of them. Yeah. So were there
lots of orchards around here then?
They all had orchards.
A big orchard down the farm. They had a cider
apple trees down there
and walnut trees. All of it.
And it would have all been used
not gone to waste?
A lot of it went to waste because
my father and his brother
they never done anything like that.
Things changed you know
in the war camp. First of all
war and all that. So as a child
and you're standing at the front of your
home and you're looking out
what could you see?
What did it look like?
Just down the moors. Yeah? Yeah.
So has it changed much then?
Not that much. Well I don't know
I haven't been over that end but I mean this
have all changed. You can see this was all flat.
Now where you would have seen ma'am
it's all like
sculpted
gardens and ponds and everything now.
You've got
the sweep down to the church
you know. You'd look out and you'd see
down towards the church
that big sweep of land there. It's got like
ornamental lakes and stuff on it.
It's all totally different.
Nothing like it.
That would have been all like
traditional
levels farmland. Yeah.
It was just ordinary farmland.
Like all the fields
had names like you know
you knew your fields by names.
Did you? Oh yeah. Do you remember any of the
names? Yeah no more.
They could take you there to see them if they were still there.
What sort of names were they?
There was Spade
Spurgeon didn't you? Yeah.
His field was. Well I told you about
Spurgeon. Yeah.
The travelling preacher.
That's just off. Not off. That's off
Castleton that is. Well you can Google him
you'll find out about him. The reverend
was he a reverend?
Spurgeon. Spurgeon.
The travelling preacher used to go around
Britain. It's a field
like you walk into
you think it would
but it slumps right down like that and
he used to have all his parishioners or whatever they were
or down he'd be up on
the top preaching. Really?
Yeah. What sort of period
was this? Victorian
I've been late Victorian over the manor. Not in old
time. Come online and you'll find a lot of stuff about
the reverend Spurgeon and he said he used to come
to Wales he used to come to mam's farm
to do his preaching and he used to come from all
around to listen to it. Well he's known as Spurgeon
Spurgeon. Spurgeon Spurgeon.
Isn't that amazing? Yeah.
Any other names?
All these Spurgeons feel for that one.
We had all names like
the field behind the orchard
and the rushy field which had
the moors like and it was all rushes. You had the field
in front of the house. You had the
rickyard as we used to call it.
It was Rickyard it was. We used to say
Rickyyard. There was a field
behind that because they had all the moes
and all in the
yard part. You had all the moes?
They wouldn't know these things.
These are ancient farming
techniques. These days you have all your hay
is put into bales
and back then
it was all they were putting in what was called
maws which is about a pile
of hay really.
Like a dome.
Yeah. A rick in other
words. That's what they said the rickyard
but the moes we used to have in there.
How do you spell moe? Moes.
M-O-W? Yeah.
Never heard that before. Yeah.
I used to
have to load the
trolleys up you know with the hay.
You'd have the workers by the side
you with the pikes of hay shutting them
up to you and then you used to make them
out with the corners first. Fill in the
middle you know and do that.
And you'd have prisoners of war to win.
Yeah and then the war came and
we'd have
corn then. You'd have
to have corn and wheat and everything
because you had to cut up
half your fields. If you had
cows and sheep together,
like we did, you had to get
rid of either the cows or the sheep
because you had to cut up, you know
plough up the land, plant.
To plant corn and wheat. Yeah.
So it was
you make the stucks as we used to call them.
You
have the sheaths of corn like you know
the bundles and you'd get two and you'd get
one of your own and you'd go like that and you'd
stand them on the, you'd put three in a row
like and you'd have all these rows of
stucks to dry the corn.
It looks gorgeous.
And then you'd get these awesome
trolleys then. It was tractors
and things. And you'd get the
awesome cad and I'd have to be on
the top then
loading.
Because I heard that when they were doing that, you know
going round cutting it, then you
would get the rabbits and the rats.
Oh yeah, rats
and everything. When it came time for
thrashing, you'd have the mows now
of corn.
You build them with all the
roots, the stalks on the
outside and you'd fill them in with
all the
heads was all in the centre to keep them
dry. Look, you build it
with all the stalks on the outside.
And then they'd come around with a
thrashing machine and a gang
to thrash. And
I used to have to be on doing them.
But you'd get up on the mow now
throwing them into the, cutting the corn
throwing them into the binder.
The rats would be coming out
and they'd just get sixpence of tail
during the war.
They'd have even tails on the floor.
Rats' tails. Who was collecting
the tails? There was some
scheme going on with, you know
at Britain or whatever it was like,
you know, waiting for victory
and that sort of thing. Did you
put rope, string around your
trouser hem so the rats
didn't run up? I'd rather go on
the loading pad where the
sacks went, corn went into
the sacks. The men used to do
most of the loading, you know.
They'd throw it in the
thrasher. So was it a mobile
thrasher? It came from farm to farm?
Yes, but it had a belt, it had a tractor
with a big belt going around it
driving it like, you know.
It had two sacks at the back of it
hooked on like, you know, and you'd
fill it, come out through the
chutes, like, you know. It was very dusty,
wasn't it? Very dusty work?
You had chaff come out of it,
like, you know.
You'd put that, chuck that away then.
So you had some POWs
coming? Yeah. Where did they come
from? Italy, some were
based.
Well, I guess which country were from and where was the POW come from?
Italy, the first lot we had.
Yeah. And then the Germans.
But
they had a camp up in Castleton, look.
Really? I didn't know that.
Just by the coaching horses. You know, they
got a nursing home there now, I think.
Yes. There used to be a
prisoner of war camp there.
Do you remember any of their names?
Well, you can remember a couple of them, but
I don't know what their surnames were.
But then Evan was one, I think
he was a butcher, I think, as far as I remember.
And I was one of them.
I seen him off.
It was nice to be known.
Fifteen then,
I was 14 or 15, I expect.
And he said this bloke down here, he couldn't speak
English.
And I had a job now, my uncle
had tell me what to tell him
to do, you know. Well, I was
to care the estate.
Anyway, I had to get this horse out.
He was the sad train that tell us about all of his
the mafia in
Sicily that he was
being chased by the mafia and he had this white
horse and I don't know what it was altogether.
And
anyway, we had him down there.
He was
quite old, mate,
because he was bald, he had hair on the top.
Quite old.
Anyway,
I tried to show him how to harness
the horse, you know, he wanted a bit of help.
Because you've got a band about as wide as that.
A leather band,
long band, it would go right round the horse's
stomach, you know. And on each
side of it you had a hook
and you'd have a lot of chains hanging on
there, like when you put on
it to tow things and all.
And I tried to get him
to do this and I couldn't really understand
and I grabbed it off
him, like, and he was one side of the horse and
there was the other. And I threw
it like that over the horse and it landed on the
top of his head and he knocked him out.
Kept the top of his head open.
So he had to go up
to the hospital over there and have a stitch
put in it. So when he came
back, no, we had
to shift some manure
from the shed, from the yard,
from the cowshed. And I had
to take it up in the field and dump it
into piles so as you
go and spread it after, there was no
spreading in them days, you do it by
hand, you know. And
ugh,
it's one of these tip carts, I don't
know if you know what I mean, it's
a one horse cart
and it goes
shafts, like, and then you've got a thing on
the back that you press the thing, push it
and it goes up and it will tip it all
out. Right. I took the
horse, I drove it up,
like, took the horse up there with him
and showed him what to do
to tip it up. So he
tipped it up, you know. I was
on the back getting it all out
and I said to him, just put it down
like, it came down, I wanted him to put it down
because you had to put your foot up and pull
it, like, you know. I couldn't
get him to understand what I was trying to
I think he was just playing
stupidly, you know. So anyway
he had his, I didn't notice where his
hand was, and I put my
it's like this, I pulled it like that
and of course he had his thumb in the way
it just got up
and went down on his thumb so
he went back to us the last we've seen of him
anyway. He'd have been
killed if he'd stayed that much longer
like that. He went back to the friend he felt
he was safer than being with a man. Oh
how stupid. Oh my
goodness. Yeah,
they were
they were more gullible, the Italians
if you can understand. They were
the Germans, the Germans
was a German, do you know what I mean? Yeah.
And we had that one that came down
I'm sure he was from the SS.
Why? Oh. He was
a real
you only had to look at him to see he was a German
he had a square face, do you know what I mean?
Blonde, tall fellow
getting on in yours
and he used to come in
where my aunt was there in the morning
cooking the breakfast like you know
and he'd come in and he'd have these
boots and he'd sort of
come in and he'd click his
heels together like that and he'd say good morning
Mrs Parsons and how are you today?
You look very nice in that dress he used to say
I didn't like him and he was
horrible
he was a real, the way he used to click his
heels, do you know what I mean? Yeah.
He was a real
Nazi he was, I'm sure he was
he used to play the piano
In the house?
Well he did have a go on the piano
my aunt's home yeah. But another
one we had which was a butcher little
fellow, if you feel sorry for him
he was a tailor
in his own country and
anyway
we had a barrage balloon come down in the
field
and it was made of silk, wasn't it?
And all the top was
in like white, like a white
silk, so nice stuff it
was. So my brother goes out now
and he drags this blinking barrage
balloon, not a barrage balloon
parachute. They used to drop mines
with parachutes look and the old
parachute used to be silk
and he brought it down now
and we had it in the house for ages
and when this German
came there he said he was a tailor
my mother was showing him this thing
he said
I'll make something, oh and my brother
he used to work on a docks because it was
special work or something
and they found
two big rolls of material
now
what do you call it? Surge I think
Grey Surge it was
and
two full sized, somebody had cut him and
they were going to pinch him and take him home
but my brother and his mate was a bit quicker
than them like you know
one was a fur like a donkey
brown fur type of thing
and another roll of surge
and he said to my mother
I'll make you a suit
in his own way like they got him to understand
so he got permission from the
camp now, could he come after
in the evenings like for so many
hours so they'd bring him
down and then they'd come back and fetch him back
like you know. Do you know he made
my mother
one jacket I think it was and two skirts
out of it and she wore them
for years
marvellous stuff it was
he said to my aunt I'll make you
a coat out of this
teddy bear type of
furry stuff like you know
so he made her a coat
and he made
me a blouse you know out of this
parachute, this silk blouse
yeah and I wore that to
death because you couldn't get clothes
during the war
that's such a lovely story
but that suit it was
she had it for years. You haven't got any
photographs of your mother wearing this stuff
I got, not with the suit no
but I got one of her standing in the porch and I must
find it because I know I got it
so you must have been delighted with the clothes
yeah
like a shirt it was like a v-neck
he was marvellous tailing me
because I used to stand and watch him
did he have a sewing machine?
we had a hand, old hand
sewing machine look
he was used to machines
in Germany
where to see him start off his feet had been going
instead of his hands anyway
he done it
button loaded and all that
oh my goodness
and the other was a butcher
another one we had was a butcher
Evan I think his name was
he was petrified
to go back
because
the wall was there
and his sister
I think his two sisters
was living in this side of the wall
he was living in Leipzig
which was the other side, the Russian side
he wanted to go back to
where his sisters was
whether he ever did I don't know
I don't think they would allow it
he had to go back to his own place
did you ever hear from them when they went back?
his brothers he didn't know
whether they were alive or dead
because they were captured
and he was afraid to go back
goodness
so this one Christmas now he said he'd do
the Christmas dinner
it was goose we were having
and he
came over now
my mother was looking and he was doing something
with these potatoes
he was grating them
and he made these potato balls
and he made cannon balls
he was all grated up and he squeezed all the water out of them
oh he was like
dough
he was horrible
it was one of their German meals
like you know
I'll try that
how sweet though
did he eat with you?
so you treated them like
anyone else really?
if you could understand them
did any of them stay here after the war?
I don't know
they never knew what happened to them
they just disappeared
because they were sent back
one day gone the next
a lot of Poles here though aren't they?
they came after though
they were after the war were they?
they had supposed to raugers place in Castleton
they went to
the castle
they took over that
what was that a camp?
the German
after the war I think it was
a lot of them stayed
because a lot of my friends they all married
these Poles
a lot of Poles
lots of them partially weren't they?
Pyrrhic, Pelicas
Machlos
we've got the Machlos, the Pelicas
so they all came to
went to the castle
I think it was
right on the end of the war
I think a lot came over in
46, 47, 48
yes it was
I tell you one field you forgot to mention
as well
graveyard field
I did I was telling you
I see
the Monks graveyard
I often wonder whether that was true
and the big
the field it went like it's all flat as you know
in the moors
it makes sense man because it's right next to an ancient public footpath
and there's this big mound
big like a field
big
Vickastan used to study that
the homes
the homes yeah
but why would it be called a home I was thinking
was this right?
the Monks graveyard there was a
no not there
but there was in a field
before you get to the farm
the Monks field you know
it's not one of our fields
it belonged to the next farm
because you had
have you still got those ditches all going in there
those fields
which ones left the homes where the homes are
yeah and we've got
ditches opposite well quite
close to the graveyard field
all these places you talk about
literally a mile from here you're just talking
just down the road you can see all
of it you can see the homes you can see Gathly Bay
graveyard field you can see
it all just down through here and then you're
wasn't survey maps John
with those names the graveyard field
the only person who knew about that was Al Viggo
yeah Matt Canastani
so he only told my mam
so my mam is the only person who ever knew that
he always used to come up the farm look and
have a talk and there's a couple of
pictures he was always after
of my grandmothers but she'd never let
him have them look what were the pictures
they were the
was that man who got his hand in
Napoleon yeah
to fight the pictures of the war
like with the horses and
battle going on you know the guns shooting
and all yeah there was a pair of them
why did your mother have those
my grandmother it was why did she have a pair of
those pictures
I don't know where she got them from but
I think they were in the farm
when she came there
because she came there
when my grandfather finished
he went to
university nearly all his sons went to
university from
Betty Illock
from in farms then
so Betty
Gethi Becham
vacant evidently
and when he finished university
she was about 21 I think he was 22
he married my grandmothers
she used to say
at her wedding
they used to have they shot the guns or
something over the wall at the end of the
front of the house
celebrations or something
he turned out a rotter
why did you call him mad
cannon Stanley
well he was a bit odd
I used to be frightened to death of him as a kid
why
well it looks like he used to have this
everything he had on was black and it was
long black like you know
coat and everything and his black
hat he had on
he had two little black dogs he used
to have with him these little things
and they used to take them
oh he used to take them in the vicarage
it was weird it was dark
and he went
little like
porches to go down these steps
into his doctors surgery
ah but it was the
vicarage then
the one just past the masons
no there was no one around there
that's the way the vicarage is now isn't it
no you know as you're
going in the church lane as you come off
the main road around
oh of course Woody's old house
yes of course yes
yes it is
it's all done out now isn't it
it's a bit of a home now
it was a smell
in there like you know what I mean
an odd smell a foasty sauce
his wife used to be all
in black
she had a maid and she was all in black
and we used to have to go there for
confirmation classes in the evening
and he
take us in this room and it was
nothing but brass like from that end of the
everything was brass that was
left at the Cadif Museum I think
really I can remember about that yeah
they used to call it the brass room
that poor old maid used to have to
clean that I think
oh but it was so creepy and dark
and dungeon-y like it used to be
the death as a kid so were you
regular at the church then
yes I used to have to go to church yeah
because it used to be a church
that was a quick stroll down the fields for you though wasn't it
yeah and you had to
go down two fields
but
was the footpath there then
there was a footpath from you know
where the old school is in
on the Marshree Road
no
anyway
there was a footpath running from there
that's there all the way
right down from Marshree Road
right down to the church
well that footpath has been reopened up
oh have it? yeah
because Sir Forrester Walker and
Stratton's all in big wigs guns
the Miss Guns
and his sisters
they kept you know the place in
Castleton oh it's all houses
it used to be Craig O'Reilly
used to call it yeah
well that used to be the
oh the Miss Guns
used to live there belonging to another
big farm by the coach and horses
the Stratton's they owned a lot of
places
the Colonel would he be there? oh no
Colonel was up in Wigleston
so there's all farms
around here?
there's all farms yeah
everyone you mixed with and went to school with
farm children
no a lot of
you know but the farms all
there's loads of farms around
there's one down Marshree that's gone now
I couldn't believe that the Grosse Farm
Grosse
oh Grosse Corner
yeah it's all houses there no? yeah I know
a couple of years ago
so what sort of games
did you play as a child?
well you had the pheasant nest
I looked for
pheasant eggs, bird's eggs
well
most of the time we used to be in the
fields you know I always had a
well most everybody
you had a stick
broomstick handle it
and you'd go vaulting over the grips
in the field
so you could do the widest one
so you'd miss
well I used to do that
I used to do that in work as well
yeah well I can imagine
well we used to
when I first started working we used to do a job
called trashing
called what John? Trashing
what's that?
that's what you're building now isn't it over the years?
I used to do that
what is it?
cut all the brambles off
the head with a
stick with a hook on it
I got my trashing hook on the back of the truck
you see that long hook sticking out?
that long bit of wood sticking out the back of my truck?
no didn't notice
I'll show you before you go that's my trashing hook
like a sickle?
yeah sort of thing
so if I want to get across the reed rather than walk around to the nearest gateway
and just jump and just propel yourself across the reed
yeah but my trashing hook was a short handed one
well you're short
that hook like that
and just a handle on it
and you'd have a stick in this hand
with a sort of a hook on it
like and you'd catch all the brambles
and you'd look behind them like that
and you'd cut them all down
and then you'd pull them all away like and burn them
and is that something you would have to do?
your parents would have to do?
I'd have to keep the hedges and everything tidy like that
the drashing is cutting the banks
when you clear out the water course
actually get weeds out the course
that would be called scouring
dredging
yeah well it depends
again it's a very
local people even
locally you've got to have different names for it
but I would always call it scouring
scouring and drashing
drash the banks, scour the water course
drash the banks first and then the water course
and then the water course
drash the banks first and then scour
yeah now the word drashing
comes from
I've got the details written down somewhere
many many years ago
they were form made
by inserting a hook
into a pole
and the piece of
like the ferrule that would go in was called
a drash eel
made of
and it'd be bound up with
read?
no it'd be a shark skin
or something like that
not eel skin John
yeah because eel skin I've heard of eel skin
being used with something else
yeah so that's probably what it is
and that would be called a drash eel
a drash eel
maybe eel?
possibly
that's interesting
what about a billock then?
we always call a billock a single handed
small
a single handed thing for chopping down
quite thick brash
was it when you
were growing up here did it feel like
a
you know a very free childhood
you could go off and do?
you went out through the door in the morning
your mother never bothered you
you'd come home when you were late
that's crazy I was like my childhood
we'd all just get a burger off
over the woods and what have you
come back when you wanted
everybody's scared to let their kids out
these days
kids these days are cosseted
if you were talking John wouldn't you
about picking blackberries
blackberries and jamsons
yeah I used to pick blackberries during the war
the people I used to know
like you know I had a stall in Cardiff Market
they'd give me a heap
of pinnits you used to call them
you know to put the fruit in
and I'd pick them then and I'd have
six pence of pennit for them
really?
did you have the Americans coming here
at all? who? Americans
during the war? yeah
they were over a couple of
years away over here but
I was in the farm then
during the war
did you ever see any you know
strafing or
searchlights or bombing?
we lived it all it was terrible
bombs dropped
yeah right over
the house the one evening
we were washing up the milking
things we had a tin shed
like a tin corrugated place
where you used to call a cooling shed
for cooling the milk and everything
and then you had a pump of course for washing
all the things up
one would be turning the pump and one would be washing
the things we were bending over washing
up and looking up quick like this because
the searchlights they had one over here
one up on Penn
Land one down Peterstone
or Bridestone here
all around you
when the sirens
went that lit up it was all
lit up you know the
searchlights had come on and the guns had been going
oh they'd blow the blinds off the
windows terrible
it was was it frightening?
well I don't know it didn't seem to frighten
you didn't seem to be frightened you
used to it like I was ten when the
war broke out initially even
about
45 I suppose no
finished in 45 about 40, 42
I expect and you had bombs dropping
around you yes
we were washing up this one night and all of a sudden
you hear them coming in
and it was like this waiting for them to
go off and they landed down by the
homes and they never went off
look thud thud it went on the floor
and they come the next morning
and blew them up
what the bombs? yeah because they hadn't
exploded oh yeah they
but they didn't make very
big I mean today I mean
I mean it's nothing
really what
what it was then was nothing to what
it is today I mean it was a
they dropped a string of bombs
one night on the
rain coming along the last
year along there they blew
big holes in the rain there was fish
out on the rain sheep up in the
trees and all the
farms down here because
they used to put incendiary
bombs out look and it lighted all up
along here it would be like dairy
like fairy land
so was there much damage to the reams
or did anyone lose their homes
I don't know
when they got bombed
when it was so spread about the railway
station they had a bomb there
on the bridge side of the bridge
and marsh there on that
by there they had a bomb dropped there
but we had loads of them my brother
used to go hunting then for
shrapnel and all stuff to keep
box it he found a
sentry bomb hadn't gone off
in the one field for that long
they were like
like an aluminium colour
like you know and the fins on
the top of it and he was walking around with
this blue and my father said get that
hunt and
he took it over to Fred Byrd's
over there do you remember Byrd's
Scrappy's?
well they were all together
Byrd's and Scrappy's
no they had a farm they used to go around
that's how they used to do all the work in the farms
during the war
they had one tractor there was one tractor
in the area
the father
and the son sort of
bought it together like you know
and used to go around the farms cutting
the corn and doing the thrashing
and all that sort of thing
and they'd give it to Fred Byrd
to take the detonators out of it
so they'd done that
yeah they didn't have done a farm for years
yeah you said you knew the names of
fields did you know the names of
individual reams?
I didn't know the names of the reams
we never knew them
we only used to play in them
that's my department
the homes though is particularly queer
because as you know this whole area
is flat as a pancake
you know the homes isn't it?
where is it John?
just down the road yeah
about a mile away
it just doesn't make sense the whole area is flat
there's this big tump
you should have a reverend for it
there was a barrow or something
he thought there was a ship had been buried there or something
it's just odd
nobody ever investigated it
no nobody ever asked really
they'd excavated or anything have they
the army used to use it during the war
it was so flat and then you had this
they'd put their targets all along it
look and they'd be target
you know practice shooting and
things like that
what about fishing?
did you ever do fishing on the reams?
only with a jam pod
or the bamboo
with the nail in
after the flashes
but there was some biggie
my friends used to be able to get up from the sea like that
with the reams yeah and we used to see them
me and my brother we'd
a fashion of like a bamboo pole
with a nail on the end
spear them and bring them home and Terry'd eat them
with me yeah he'd trade them he didn't like it
though my eldest brother
he'd eat anything biggie eels caught
in there yeah cause
old Mr. Coyter used to
mend shoes for the you know years
ago he had a shed
do maching he used to do all his shoemaking
like you know yeah and
he used to go for the eels if he really
caught any
Bill Lewis he was always a clotting
wasn't he? yeah
I heard clotting
what is it?
clotting is a way of catching eels
they dig the garden
catch all the worms and thread cotton
or something wool
thread them on wool and they've got
the teeth that come
I've personally done it with dental floss
that's right so that would be called
a clot of worms okay
dropping in the reeds and lifting out the eels
teeth are stuck on the wool
it's an effective way of catching them yeah
I remember dad
taking me down to watch Bill
Lewis was it Bill Lewis?
yeah it would have been Bowsher
he'd be clotting and
fascinate me watching Philip his sack of
eels well Bill Lewis used
to work on the drainage board
and I used to hear stories about him
he'd be taking on more eggs
to eat and stuff
I heard that somebody the other day
his grandfather
this is at Roggett
his grandfather used to send him out to get
not moorhens
it was something like sky larks
or some sort of bird
egg I don't
think it was moorhens
well ducks
no it was a lapwing
something like
highly illegal
yes he said oh yeah but his
son because they were very rich
and his grandfather liked it he'd send his son out
we used to get
lots of them yeah I can remember
my brother and his friend years
ago because we used to tag on as well
when he was younger
they decided they were going to
get some birds eggs now
and have an omelette
so they made
this little fire now
in the field with the sticks across
it all right and they would go get
what we gonna cook them in
cook them in a tin
these omelettes
oh
Colin Pretty was one
they got these eggs now and they cracked
they had all sorts of eggs
and they talked about a scrambled egg
they put it in this tin
and they would cook it on top
my brother failed to eat it
he didn't eat it
Colin Pretty had his and Sid
was it raw?
so how far is
how far so this is like
do you call this the moors or the levels?
the moors we always called it
the moors so
what was it
special playground what was it
you know I know that you grew up with it but
what was it like
I mean did you know about wildlife
did you know your flowers did you know your
animals? well that's where we got all our names from
we used to know a lot about flowers because
when you walk up the banks
you're walking up the lanes
and all you see all these different
flowers growing
what you could cooklepins we used to call them
in and lords and ladies
would be the others and
oh all sorts of wild
violets and
wild strawberries we used to eat the wild strawberries
only little things
and all that sort of thing
and what's changed then Valerie what's gone
has anything changed?
everything's changed haven't it the wars
well he dug up well he vaulted all the
plants all the
all the roots that I used to know I bet
it's not there now are they I mean this for instance
this road going down there was a
was a lane
it wasn't a road it was just a
just a rough lane yeah
cobbles you know all stones and
everything and he said join that with
the road there that's right yeah
well this lane would just lead into
just countryside
with all lanes wouldn't it really
yeah well you'd get cars
drive down to Marshfield but you'd have like
Castleton and Marshfield Peterstone
and St. Price but everywhere
in between would just be little farm buildings
and little lanes connecting them all
not the major roads
when you're talking about Green Lane the Green Lane
that I knew you know the farm
the gate that got GB on it
yeah the other
side of the road a bit further down there's a lane
going down there
that one goes to the
Churchyard yeah
Penning Lane I've always called that
we've always called it what do you mean to the
Churchyard the Churchyard
for you the bottom of there you could get
the Monks Graveyard for you yeah
yeah Penning Lane yeah
I've always called that Penning Lane no we always called it
Green Lane that's what he said to you
can you get out down the bottom
you look on the maps
there's ever so many lanes
called Green Lane you've got Green Lane maps
Penning Lane is called Green Lane
on the maps
lots of them are called Green Lane
I know that word I was trying to think of
the belt they used to call them yeah belt
that's what we always call it the belt now
we've got the belt and the second belt
that's where the man go me did was the belt
yeah the belt yeah that's what we call it now
but the railway lane isn't it
if I asked somebody to go down there I don't say
go down Penning Lane I say pop down the belt
yes you always call it the belt
and you've got that
because you've got Penning Lane you've got
Cozy Lane down in Peterstone
and they always used to run round
like one into the other didn't they
different places like you know
it's all so different
these lanes all still exist
they're just a lot of them are tarmac roads
now and yeah
you've got sort of a lot more
residential housing than they would have
been then haven't they yeah that's strange
all the new farmland
there was all the mostly farms
and farm labourers houses
and all of these was built
so six of these was built for the farm
really really yeah
what about
how far are we from the sea wall here
as the crow flies
one mile to the
purgoy the red arch
two and a bit
two and a bit miles
it wouldn't be three miles would it
might squeeze
three miles
have you ever gone down there to the sea wall
we almost don't go down there
that was an outing to go to
St. Brides
all the stuff down St. Brides when he was a kid
wasn't it yeah they had
they used to have
the shows come down there you know with the
roundabouts and all the shows
and everything what to St. Brides yeah
over the top of the sea wall yeah
that's right really yeah
and anybody knows about this but I was talking to
somebody the other day right and they said
to me I was talking to someone
they reckon they used to be fair
and stuff over the sea wall
I said yeah really
they said yeah
the foundations the buildings are still
there now and what's left of the brick
walls and stuff and the little shops used to be
there that's right there were shops what you mean literally
over the top of the sea wall
really yes and people
used to come from miles didn't they to walk they'd
walk down there well I've walked
that was an outing that was a day's outing
do you know where's Dusk Lighthouse? Yes
do you know the lighthouse hotel?
Yes, yes
if you walked between the two of them
you walked round the top of the sea wall
on the seaward side you've got a bit of grassy
area yeah there
that's where it all used to happen so if you'd face
shadow bands take people from Newport
down there
that would be the local place
to go on a Sunday all the family would go
and that would be the exciting day out would be down there
and you see all the public
footpaths all head down towards there
loads of public footpaths that public
footpath the mam's on about down Penning
Lane you carry on walking down there
then you go down the bridle path down
Wheel Lane which then takes you across the road
and straight down to St. Brides
it comes out the back of the perl
and then you're along the top of the sea wall
and all these all these lanes
all these public footpaths they all head
down towards there
you go down there and you'd hope your mother'd
buy you something and the last time we went down
I remember she bought me a bazooka
a long thing with a
you had one of them I remember them
it's a
like a long piece of metal
like that and you'd blow the end
like a whistle something but on the top it had
a little round thing with a
no you just made you
had to tut it with your
yourself like you
tut it that all the way home to hold the shirt up
so but certainly it was on the other side of the
sea wall you'd have you know a roundabout
and
and things like that
and shops and all
proper shops all that little fairground
stalls you know
and how long would they be there?
even I can remember the brick walls that were left from
those shops when I was a kid
and the foundations I haven't been down there
for a good few years
the foundations are still there
the ponds as well where the
old foundations used to be
yeah you go down in there
and you spend a few minutes there
with a metal detector
was it for a special
occasion was it like the main fair
mostly on the like holiday periods
bank holidays if you don't go down there
wouldn't they? so you get lots of people going
down there I know I was down there
down Peterstone when my friends used to
live in Peterstone so they all
decided they were going to walk to
St. Brides now to
the fair so of course
I had to go with them didn't I?
walking from Peterstone now all along the seawall
right on the top of
the seawall all along there
and half way along
of course we had some addresses under me
it belted down we had a terrific
thunderstorm and I was petrified
of thunder in them days
oh god I never forgot it
yeah yeah I always
went down the seawall
did they have like
swings and rides
but what you have in the
not a great big one
like you know
there was horses up and down you know
going round oh how exciting
carousel is the word you like
carousel that's it
did you ever go swimming in the sea
or in the reens or anything like that?
it was too dirty yeah in the reens
the boys used to go swimming
because one got drowned down there
really? yeah
they reckon he was a very good swimmer apparently
that was in the sluice down Peterstone
are you talking about the Broadway?
I'm talking about Peterstone now
it goes out to the sea
it used to be all mud and
sludge
yeah you walk off
the corner
where you come down from Marshfield
straight across
and along there over the stairs
down to Peterstone to the seawall
was that when you
were at? yeah when I was
oh you're talking about the gout
Peterstone gout
yeah down there
yeah well I spent a bit of time
sliding down that mud myself
anyway they
got Dickie Loftus
and that gang you know
and
what's Boeshe Lewis's boy
Sid, Sid Lewis yeah
there was a gang of boys who used to go down there
swimming you know and this one boy
he lived halfway
Marshfield Road you know and
there was two white houses
on the other side of the road that was built
for the soldiers
Lionel Carly lived in one
opposite there
there was a big cottage there
and he lived there and
he was
with them as well and he was supposed to be a very
good swimmer but he had cramp or something
and anyway
he drowned and they said
I don't know if it was true or not
that when they told his mother his mother
ran from there all the way
down to that sluice where he was
and collapsed and
she never
started coming to probably after
she was a bit funny like you know
yeah he was about
ten I think nine or ten
something like that they weren't very old
they had been two
drownedings down there got drowned
down Marshfield Lane
Marshfield Road is it deep?
is it deep?
because the tide was in
that's true it's in yes
when it's you know there's no water
it looks huge it's all mud
both sides like you know
because in the winter
in the summer time the spring we used to
walk the cows now
from the farm all the way down
to this
lanes down here
and they had fields as I said
the farm yard
what do you call that place?
the
Monksfield by there
but it was alongside the road we used to put
the cows the cows in there now
and then we'd have to go down twice a day
and work in the field really?
you used to carry your stool down
you used to carry your stool sometimes you'd be
sat there on the stool and the cow would be over there
you'd go walking off
so they got to know
you know and you'd have
to turn in the fields would you?
just tip the milk in?
yeah you'd have to do another van like you know tip it and then bring it on and cool it
and all the rest of it
even I can
remember chains being used
do you remember the M4
going in? do you remember that?
yes that's where you got your hay fever from
that
I can remember the M4
being built
why did you get hay fever from that?
because the verges of the
the road hasn't been cut at all
there was grass about that height
and they'd go I got up there now one night
and they'd go wow what are you doing now?
we had some sort of improvised sledge
so you were like flying down the banks
from all this grass
clouds of pollen and ever since then I've suffered with hay fever
really?
I can remember going up there look before the M4
was built sledging down that huge
massive great slope
really John? Jesus Christ I wouldn't do it now
I remember the speeds
we used to get up there now and I'd say
it was great fun when you're kids but Christ
did you also take a cardboard?
we had sledges
going up there on sledges
you feel it from the abandoned
barn up on the top with my lips there
what's the name of the farm?
Pettelhamn farm?
no
Polcox farm
yeah Polcox what was the name of it?
Kevnon
Kevnon yeah
well from the top there
all the way down to
where the A48 is now
underneath where the motorway
just a huge great slope
snow wow
the speeds you get up to
great knack speeds
any of us would have killed
yeah and you see Russell
drop over 40 foot off a swing
up there into a rocky
stream
so do you living here
do you see yourself
do you get Wendt Lug levels
and you get Keljikop levels do you feel
you're part of the same area or do you feel
different too?
well since this
it's not the same
like we're doing a dip
where you could see
right out
and then we had these people come
next door recently
put a big fence
up as well I don't like
what you girls been thinking about it?
the thing about it is they're not back
back years ago
people didn't have cars
didn't have phones
they lived on the other side of Newport
you're not going to see them
it was very very much your very local community
and
you know people from Peterstone
they wouldn't know many people from St. Price
very very isolated
communities
and Marshall would have been like the biggest
village on the
Wendt Lug levels
it's huge
it's massive
you see two streets before
I can remember when the terrace was built
yeah I do too
so all it was was just one street
and a collection of houses really
there was a big sprawling
sort of
Sandy Lane's gone that was a farm
wasn't it
Sandy Lane?
Dufferin?
no I'm talking about Marshall Road
Sandy Lane?
yeah
your latest, oh god
a farm called Sandy Lane
Goff Jones used to have it
where by?
no you come down past the school
down the school
you go so far down the road and
there's some cottages on the side
on the left?
on the right going down
on the side
go down past the school
and there's a corner
you go round the corner didn't you?
yeah when Nicky Walden always used to live
on the left
not as far as there back here before you turn the corner
that corner was called
Sandy Lane Farm Goff Jones had that
used to come over
to have extra milk off us because he didn't have
enough milk to his customers
yeah
you go
to it
as I said just past the school you go down so far
there's a lane down there?
yeah well that's Sandy Lane
I know that lane Lionhall Collier had on the ground down here
you go round the back of those cottages
that's right Sandy Lane
and the farm was the end one
where did you go to school then Val?
Marshfield
what was that like?
well it was just a village school it was during the war
during the war?
when I was
ten when war broke out
but you never had any
schooling during the war
we didn't anyway all we had was
piles of
leaflets
to put in envelopes to send out
to people there was wings for victory
walls
have ears
dig for victory
what was the other one? you knew them all off
my dad had forgotten them all I don't know
and you had to put these in envelopes
and send them up
and then
perhaps all of a sudden the bells would go
and you'd have to
run then and see how fast
you could get to your nearest
shelter like you know or whatever
things like that
we never done any
schooling
so how old were you when you left school?
fourteen
where did you go then?
on the farm to work
well that's
my father died that year
he was fifteen
because I was with him
they used to have
market garden as well
and they used to take
stuff in on a Friday
and then Tuesday I think it was
my father had been ill
for a long time
and he couldn't find out what was wrong with him
they took him to hospital and they removed
part of his lung
and his death
certificate
said preliminary TB
but I don't
think they knew what he had
but in later life as time went on
the farmers was dying look
with the same thing
there was I think four from Marshfield
died all with the same thing look
and they found out after
it was farmers lung
they called it farmers lung
what it was caused from
you're talking about the mows
if they weren't thatched properly
or a hole getting them
and the rain go down
in the top
you'd have a
strip all the way down here would be
foasty or mold
look
you have a big hay net
to cut your
hair into squares
you get that off
and you'd shake it off
and you'd take the weight
it's a wonder they never had it because they shook enough of it
and my father
he used to do the
hay cutting and things like that
and it used to stick together
it was real wet moldy gone
and dried out some of it
and that's what they found it was
the spores from the hay
they call it farmers lung because they all died
with the same symptoms look
so what did your mother do then?
she lived here she was 97
she lived on the farm?
no she never even seen a cow till after my father died
never went to the cowshed
really?
she was frightened to death of horses
what did she do then?
pardon?
she lived in Cardiff when she
she was a country person
frightened to death of it
and the horses knew it they chased it everywhere
running down
a lane with a
with Derek in a push chair and the horse chasing a
nobby?
so because you were tenants
you had to get off the farm then did you?
when your father died?
no no no
it was in my grand's name actually
ok
no
they weren't one tenant
my grandfather
was the actual tenant he died
and he went on to her look and then to the
two sons sort of thing
so what did you do
you stayed working on the farm did you?
yeah
and then you met your husband?
yeah because he came down here to work didn't he?
so he came to work on the farm?
the war ag they used to call it
where did he come from?
Lanilith
how old were you when you met him?
really? what was his name?
Roy, Southam, naturally
and where did you get married?
down in the church
so did you have roping ceremony then?
no it was a small
little do
so are there
you didn't do it the them days because you
you had your own
things there was none of all this
what they do today like you know
so
there we are
well I think should we leave it there?
there's so many more things I'd love to ask you
have you?
we've been talking
for nearly two hours
oh have I?
unusual